## Chapter 2
### Organizational Strategy, Competitive Advantage , and Information Systems

### Learning Objectives
1. Identify various business pressures that affect organizations in the digital age.

1. Identify effective IT responses to different kinds of business pressures.

1. Describe strategic IS and Porter’s five competitive forces.

1. Describe the strategies that organizations typically adopt to counter Porter’s five competitive forces.

### Several Terms

- **BusinessEnvironment:** The combination of social,legal, economic, physical, and political factors in which businesses operate.

- **Business Environment:** The combination of social, legal, economic, physical, and political factors in which businesses operate.

- Significant changes in any of these factors are likely to create **Business Pressures** on organizations.
1. Organizations Responses with IS

- Strategic systems
- Customer focus
- Make-to-order
- e-business
- e-commerce

1. Competitive Advantage: Any assets that provide an organization with edges against its competitors. For example:
- cost 
- quality
- speed 
- market control
- large-than-average profits

### Types of Business Pressures
1. Market Pressures: Business pressures generated by:
- Global economy (Globalization)
- Intense competition
- Changing nature of workforce: Diversified workforce
- Powerful customers: Customers (informed users) become more knowledgeable about the products and services

1. Technology Pressures:Business pressures caused by
- Technological innovation and obsolescence: Legacy vs. Cutting edge
- nformation overload: End users must be able to access, navigate, and utilize vast stores of data, information, and knowledge.

1. Societal/Political/Legal Pressures: Business pressures related to:
- Social responsibility: Physical environment, philanthropy, education, social problems, and more...
- Government regulation and deregulation regarding health, safety, environmental protection, equal opportunity...
- Spending for social programs.
- Spending to protect against terrorism.
- Ethics: e.g., standards of right and wrong in information processing practices.

## Business Pressures, Organizational Performance & Responses and IT Support

### Organizational Responses

1. Strategic Systems:provide organizations with advantages to
- Increase market share and/or profits.
- Better negotiate with suppliers.
- Prevent competitors from entering markets.
- Strategic IS

### Organizational Responses
- Customer Focus: provide superb customer service that can make the difference between attracting and retaining customers.
- For examples, IT tools and business processes to keep customers happy.
- Make-to-Order: Producing customized (made to individual specifications) products and services.
- Mass Customization: Producing a large quantity of items, but it customizes them to match the needs and preferences of individual customers.
- Electronic commerce: The process of buying, selling, transferring, or exchanging products, services, or information via computer networks, e.g., the Internet.
- Electronic business: A broader concept servicing customers, collaborating with business partners, and performing electronic transactions within an organization.

### Competitive Advantage & Strategic IS
1. Strategic Information Systems: IS that help an organization implement its strategic goals and improve performance and productivity.
1. Competitive Advantage: Any assets that provide an organization with edges against its competitors. For example:
> Cost
> Quality
> Speed
> Market control
> Larger-than-average profits

### Competitive Advantage & Strategic IS Porter’s Competitive Forces Model
> Porter’s Competitive Forces Model 
- The threat from rivalry is high when there is intense competition among many firms in an industry. The threat is low when the competition is among fewer firms and is not as intense.
- The threat that new competitors will enter the market is high when entry is easy; and low when there are significant barriers to entry.
- Supplier power is high when buyers have few choices from whom to buy; and low when buyers have many choices.
- Buyer power is high when buyers have many choices from whom to buy; and low when buyers have few choices.If there are few alternatives, then the threat is low.
- Barrier to Entry: a product or service feature that customers expect from organizations.
- Switching Costs: the costs, in money and time, imposed by a consumer or business when changing from one supplier or product to another. This can include expenses related to purchasing new equipment, retraining employees, adapting to new processes, and potential disruptions to workflow or operations.

### Competitive Advantage & Strategic IS Porter’s Value Chain Model
Transform Raw Materials into Products &#8594 Storage and Distribution of Products &#8594 Marketing , sales, and customer support

- Value Chain: A sequence of activities through which the organization’s inputs are transformed into more valuable outputs.
- Value System: Includes the suppliers that provide the inputs necessary to the firm along with their value chains. After the firm creates products, these products pass through the value chains of distributors (which also have their own value chains), all the way to the customers.
### Competitive Advantage & Strategic IS Strategies for Competitive Advantage
- Cost leadership strategy: Produce products and/or services at the lowest cost in the industry.
- Innovation Strategy: Introduce new products and services, add new features to existing products and services, or develop new ways to produce them.
- Differentiation Strategy: Offering different products, services, or product features than competitors.
- Operational Effectiveness Strategy: A firm performs business activities more effectively than its rivals.
- Customer Orientation Strategy: Concentrate on making customers happy.

### Competitive Advantage & Strategic IS Business – IT Alignment
- Business – IT Alignment: IT functions directly support business objectives through the tight integration of IT functions with the organization’s strategy, mission, and goals.

### Characteristics: Excellent Business-IT Alignment
1. The organization views IT as an engine of innovation that continually transforms the business, often creating new revenue streams.
2. The organization views its internal & external customers & their customer service functions as supremely important.
3. The organization rotates business & IT professionals across departments and job functions.
4. The organization provides overarching goals that are completely clear to IT and business employees.
5. The organization ensures that IT employees understand how the company operates.
6. The organization creates a vibrant and inclusive company culture.

## SUMMARY:
1. Identify various business pressures that affect organizations.
2. Identify effective IT responses to different kinds of business pressures.
3. Describe strategic IS and Porter’s five competitive forces.
4. Describe the strategies that an organization typically adopts to counter Porter’s five competitive forces.


